Km rna with umis methods (#625)
broadinstitute/warp: website/docs/Pipelines/RNA_with_UMIs_Pipeline/rna-with-umis.methods.md

Following alignment, the read group information from the genome-aligned BAM was copied to the transcriptome-aligned BAM using Samtools. Both BAM files were then sorted by coordinate with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created. Duplicate reads were sorted by UMI with UMI-tools to differentiate between biological and PCR duplicates. To specify the tag where the UMIs were stored, --extract-umi-method was set to "tag" and --umi-tag was set to "RX". Unmapped reads were deduplicated with --unmapped-reads = use. Tagged BAM files were output using the option --output-bam. Picard's SortSam tool was used again to sort the BAM files by queryname and create MD5 digest files. PCR duplicates were marked, and duplicate metrics were calculated using Picard's MarkDuplicates tool with GATK. BAM files were sorted with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created.

The genome-aligned BAM file was then used to calculate summary metrics using RNASeQC and Picard's CollectRNASeqMetrics and CollectMultipleMetrics tools. CollectMultipleMetrics was used with the programs “CollectInsertSizeMetrics” and “CollectAlignmentSummaryMetrics”. 

> The final outputs of the RNA with UMIs pipeline included a transcriptome-aligned, duplicate-marked BAM file with corresponding BAI and duplicate metrics files, a genome-aligned, duplicate-marked BAM file with corresponding BAI and duplicate metrics files, and metrics files generated with RNASeQC and Picard tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final outputs of the RNA with UMIs pipeline included a transcriptome-aligned, duplicate-marked BAM file with corresponding index and duplication metrics, a genome-aligned, duplicate-marked BAM file with corresponding index, duplication metrics, and metrics generated with RNASeQC and Picard tools.
```

## Methods

Data preprocessing, gene counting, and metric calculation were performed using the RNA with UMIs v1.0.3 pipeline, which uses Picard v2.26.6, fgbio v1.4.0, STAR v2.7.10a, Samtools v1.11, UMI-tools v1.1.1, and RNA-SeQC v2.4.2 with default tool parameters unless otherwise specified. Reference files are publicly available in the [Broad References](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/gcp-public-data--broad-references;tab=objects?pageState=(%22StorageObjectListTable%22:(%22f%22:%22%255B%255D%22))&prefix=&forceOnObjectsSortingFiltering=false) Google Bucket and are also listed in [example configuration files](https://github.com/broadinstitute/warp/tree/develop/pipelines/broad/rna_seq/test_inputs) in the in the WARP repository.

Paired-end FASTQ files were first converted to an unmapped BAM using Picard's FastqToSam tool with SORT_ORDER = unsorted. (If a read group unmapped BAM file is used as input for the pipeline, this step is skipped.) Unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) were extracted from the unmapped BAM using fgbio's ExtractUmisFromBam and stored in the RX read tag.

> After the extraction of UMIs, the unmapped BAM file was aligned to the GENCODE GRCh38 (hg38) v34 with HLA, ALT, and decoy contigs removed (or GENCODE GRCh37 [hg19] v19) using STAR. The --readFilesType and --readFilesCommand parameters were set to "SAM PE" and "samtools view -h", respectively, to indicate that the input was a BAM file. To specify that the output was an unsorted BAM that included unmapped reads, --outSAMtype was set to "BAM Unsorted" and --outSAMunmapped was set to "Within". A transcriptome-aligned BAM was also output with --quantMode = TranscriptomeSAM. To match [ENCODE bulk RNA-seq data standards](https://www.encodeproject.org/data-standards/rna-seq/long-rnas/), the alignment was performed with parameters --outFilterType = BySJout, --outFilterMultimapNmax = 20, --outFilterMismatchNmax = 999, --alignIntronMin = 20, --alignIntronMax = 1000000, --alignMatesGapMax = 1000000, --alignSJoverhangMin = 8, and --alignSJDBoverhangMin = 1. The fraction of reads required to match the reference was set with --outFilterMatchNminOverLread = 0.33 and the fraction of allowable mismatches to read length was set with --outFilterMismatchNoverLmax = 0.1. Chimeric alignments were included with --chimSegmentMin = 15, where 15 was the minimum length of each segment, and --chimMainSegmentMultNmax = 1 to prevent main chimeric segments from mapping to multiple sites. To output chimeric segments with soft-clipping in the aligned BAM, --chimOutType was set to "WithinBAM SoftClip". A maximum of 20 protruding bases at the ends of alignments was allowed with --alignEndsProtrude = 20 ConcordantPair. 

Reviewer 2: Adding to the last sentence: "A maximum of 20 protruding bases at the ends of alignments was allowed with --alignEndsProtrude = 20 ConcordantPair, so the reads from small cDNA fragments (where we read into adapters) will not be dropped." I'd be happy to show you what this means in our meeting later.

> After the extraction of UMIs, the unmapped BAM file was aligned to the GENCODE GRCh38 (hg38) v34 with HLA, ALT, and decoy contigs removed (or GENCODE GRCh37 [hg19] v19) using STAR. The --readFilesType and --readFilesCommand parameters were set to "SAM PE" and "samtools view -h", respectively, to indicate that the input was a BAM file. To specify that the output was an unsorted BAM that included unmapped reads, --outSAMtype was set to "BAM Unsorted" and --outSAMunmapped was set to "Within". A transcriptome-aligned BAM was also output with --quantMode = TranscriptomeSAM. To match [ENCODE bulk RNA-seq data standards](https://www.encodeproject.org/data-standards/rna-seq/long-rnas/), the alignment was performed with parameters --outFilterType = BySJout, --outFilterMultimapNmax = 20, --outFilterMismatchNmax = 999, --alignIntronMin = 20, --alignIntronMax = 1000000, --alignMatesGapMax = 1000000, --alignSJoverhangMin = 8, and --alignSJDBoverhangMin = 1. The fraction of reads required to match the reference was set with --outFilterMatchNminOverLread = 0.33 and the fraction of allowable mismatches to read length was set with --outFilterMismatchNoverLmax = 0.1. Chimeric alignments were included with --chimSegmentMin = 15, where 15 was the minimum length of each segment, and --chimMainSegmentMultNmax = 1 to prevent main chimeric segments from mapping to multiple sites. To output chimeric segments with soft-clipping in the aligned BAM, --chimOutType was set to "WithinBAM SoftClip". A maximum of 20 protruding bases at the ends of alignments was allowed with --alignEndsProtrude = 20 ConcordantPair. 

Author: Updated

> Following alignment, the read group information from the genome-aligned BAM was copied to the transcriptome-aligned BAM using Samtools. Both BAM files were then sorted by coordinate with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created. Duplicate reads were sorted by UMI with UMI-tools to differentiate between biological and PCR duplicates. To specify the tag where the UMIs were stored, --extract-umi-method was set to "tag" and --umi-tag was set to "RX". Unmapped reads were deduplicated with --unmapped-reads = use. Tagged BAM files were output using the option --output-bam. Picard's SortSam tool was used again to sort the BAM files by queryname and create MD5 digest files. PCR duplicates were marked, and duplicate metrics were calculated using Picard's MarkDuplicates tool with GATK v4.1.9.0. BAM files were sorted with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created.

Reviewer 2: I think we can omit the first sentence about read group information—it's an implementation detail that normal users don't need to know about.

Reviewer 2: "Duplicate reads were sorted by UMI…" -> "Using umi-tools group, putative duplicates were further divided into subgroups by UMIs and any sequencing errors in UMI bases were corrected."

"Unmapped reads were deduplicated with --unmapped-reads = use." What this argument turned on the unmapped reads are included in the output file as is, rather than discarded. This is important for us, so if the user chooses to reprocess the data in the future, we have not thrown out any reads.

Reviewer 2: Let's talk about this paragraph later.

Author: Updated

> Following alignment, the read group information from the genome-aligned BAM was copied to the transcriptome-aligned BAM using Samtools. Both BAM files were then sorted by coordinate with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created. Duplicate reads were sorted by UMI with UMI-tools to differentiate between biological and PCR duplicates. To specify the tag where the UMIs were stored, --extract-umi-method was set to "tag" and --umi-tag was set to "RX". Unmapped reads were deduplicated with --unmapped-reads = use. Tagged BAM files were output using the option --output-bam. Picard's SortSam tool was used again to sort the BAM files by queryname and create MD5 digest files. PCR duplicates were marked, and duplicate metrics were calculated using Picard's MarkDuplicates tool with GATK v4.1.9.0. BAM files were sorted with Picard's SortSam tool, and index and MD5 digest files were created.

Reviewer 3: I don't expect you to know the answer to this, but is there a reason we are using GATK v4.1.9.0 here? This should be updated to v4.2.5.0 to address the log4j vulnerability (that may very well be in a separate PR though)

Reviewer 2: Great catch. No reason, and in fact we should be using a picard docker here. I will correct this my contamination PR.

> The genome-aligned, duplicate-marked BAM file was then used to calculate summary metrics using RNASeQC, Picard's CollectRNASeqMetrics and CollectMultipleMetrics tools, and GATK's (v4.2.5.0) GetPileupSummaries and CalculateContamination tools. CollectMultipleMetrics was used with the programs “CollectInsertSizeMetrics” and “CollectAlignmentSummaryMetrics”. GetPileupSummaries was run with the read filters, "WellformedReadFilter" and "MappingQualityAvailableReadFilter" disabled.

Reviewer 2: "GetPileupSummaries was run with the read filters, "WellformedReadFilter" and "MappingQualityAvailableReadFilter" disabled."—probably another implementation detail we can omit here. Although first I should ask, who's the intended reader?

Reviewer 2: "GATK's GetPileupSummaries and CalculateContamination tools" -> "GATK's CalculateContamination." GetPileupSummaries is just a preprocessing step.

Author: I hesitate to remove GetPileupSummaries - to me it seems like an important detail for getting the same results.

Reviewer 2: Yea actually the read filters for GetPileupSummaries are important, so good call!

> Following alignment, both BAM files were sorted by coordinate with Picard's SortSam tool. UMI-tools was then used to further divide putative duplicates into subgroups based on UMI and sequencing errors in UMIs were corrected. To specify the tag where the UMIs were stored, --extract-umi-method was set to "tag" and --umi-tag was set to "RX". Unmapped reads were included in the output file with --unmapped-reads = use. Tagged BAM files were output using the option --output-bam. SortSam was used again to sort the BAM files by queryname for Picard's MarkDuplicates tool with GATK. MarkDuplcates was used to mark PCR duplicates and calculate duplicate metrics. After duplicate marking, BAM files were sorted by coordiante using SortSam to facilitate downstream analysis.

Reviewer 2: "Picard's MarkDuplicates tool with GATK" can omit "with GATK"

Reviewer 2: But other than that great!

Paired-end FASTQ files were first converted to an unmapped BAM using Picard's FastqToSam tool with SORT_ORDER = unsorted. (If a read group unmapped BAM file is used as input for the pipeline, this step is skipped.) Unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) were extracted from the unmapped BAM using fgbio's ExtractUmisFromBam and stored in the RX read tag.

> After the extraction of UMIs, the reads were aligned using STAR to the GRCh38 (hg38) reference with HLA, ALT, and decoy contigs removed with gene annotations from GENCODE v34 (or GRCh37 [hg19] with gene annotations from GENCODE v19). The --readFilesType and --readFilesCommand parameters were set to "SAM PE" and "samtools view -h", respectively, to indicate that the input was a BAM file. To specify that the output was an unsorted BAM that included unmapped reads, --outSAMtype was set to "BAM Unsorted" and --outSAMunmapped was set to "Within". A transcriptome-aligned BAM was also output with --quantMode = TranscriptomeSAM. To match [ENCODE bulk RNA-seq data standards](https://www.encodeproject.org/data-standards/rna-seq/long-rnas/), the alignment was performed with parameters --outFilterType = BySJout, --outFilterMultimapNmax = 20, --outFilterMismatchNmax = 999, --alignIntronMin = 20, --alignIntronMax = 1000000, --alignMatesGapMax = 1000000, --alignSJoverhangMin = 8, and --alignSJDBoverhangMin = 1. The fraction of reads required to match the reference was set with --outFilterMatchNminOverLread = 0.33 and the fraction of allowable mismatches to read length was set with --outFilterMismatchNoverLmax = 0.1. Chimeric alignments were included with --chimSegmentMin = 15, where 15 was the minimum length of each segment, and --chimMainSegmentMultNmax = 1 to prevent main chimeric segments from mapping to multiple sites. To output chimeric segments with soft-clipping in the aligned BAM, --chimOutType was set to "WithinBAM SoftClip". A maximum of 20 protruding bases at the ends of alignments was allowed with --alignEndsProtrude set to "20 ConcordantPair" to prevent reads from small cDNA fragments that were sequenced into adapters from being dropped. 

Reviewer 2: As we discussed earlier this week `--outFilterMatchNminOverLread` and `--outFilterMismatchNoverLmax` are equivalent. I still need to confirm this, will update the doc when I confirm that this is not an issue. We will likely set --outFilterMatchNminOverLread to default.

Author: I'll update once we know for sure that it works! Thanks!
